# pathtimes.py(1) -- evaluate arrival-time integrals at arbitrary points

## SYNOPSIS

`pathtimes.py` [`-h`] [`-t`] [`-s`] [`-b`] [`-q`] [`-j` <JOINTS>]
               <ELEMENTS> <TARGETS> <TRACER> <SLOWNESS> <OUTPUT>

## DESCRIPTION

Compute path integrals through a slowness image <SLOWNESS> using bent-ray
tracing as well as compensated and uncompensated straight-ray tracing. Start
points for path integrals are elements with (x, y, z) coordinates in the
keymat(7) file <ELEMENTS>, keyed by element index. End points for path
integrals are described in the file <TARGETS>, which is either a binary matrix
of (x, y, z) coordinates or a TRMAP file of element indices that describe
desired and end indices in <ELEMENTS>. Path tracer options are specified in the
`pathtracer` section of the YAML configuration file <TRACER>, and <OUTPUT> is
either a binary matrix of path integrals for every element in <ELEMENTS> and
every target in the binary matrix <TARGETS> (with target index varying most
rapidly) or, when <TARGETS> is a TRMAP file, a keymat(7) file mapping
transmit-receive index pairs to path integrals.


## OPTIONS

- `-h`, `--help`:
  Print a help message and exit.

- `-t`, `--trlist`:
  Treat <TARGETS> as a TRMAP instead of coordinates. See fhfft.py(1) for
  details about TRMAP files. The transmit-receive pairs in <TARGETS> index into
  <ELEMENTS>.

- `-s`, `--nostraight`:
  Disable compensated and uncompensated straight-ray tracing in the output.

- `-b`, `--nobent`:
  Disable bent-ray tracing in the output.

- `-q`, `--quiet`:
  Disable printing of status bar during computation.

- `-j` <JOINTS>, `--joints` <JOINTS>:
  Save interior joints in bent paths with at least 3 segments to the keymat(7)
  file <JOINTS> (requires bent tracing). For each transmit-receive index pair
  describing a traced path, the (x, y, z) coordinates of all interior joints
  are concatenated into a value list.


## COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2014--2018 Andrew J. Hesford. All rights reserved.


## SEE ALSO

fhfft.py(1) - For a description of TRMAP files  
keymat(7) - For a description of the keymat format  
WaveformMap(7) - For a description of the WaveformMap format
