# waveviz.py(1) -- plot waveforms in videos or PDF images

## SYNOPSIS

`waveviz.py` [`-h`] [`-l`] [`-z`] [`-s`] [`-w` <START> <END>] [`-a` <ATIMES>]
             [`-c` <COL>] [`-t` <THRESH>] [`-f` <FREQ>] [`-n` <NSAMP>]
	     [`-b` <BITRATE>] [`--one-sided`] [`-r`] [`-e`] [`-E`]
	     <OUTPUT> <INPUT> [<INPUT> ...]

## DESCRIPTION

Given one or more WaveformMap(7) files <INPUT>, create a 2-D color image of
waveforms or a video that compares waveforms frame-by-frame.

In image mode, which is enabled when <OUTPUT> has a _pdf_ extension, all
waveforms will be plotted on the same axes with waveform index along the _x_
axis, sample index along the _y_ axis and waveform amplitude shown as color
variations. The <INPUT> files should provide one waveform per transmit-receive
key. The order in which waveforms appear along the _x_ axis is determined by
the numerical sort order of their transmit-receive keys.

In video mode, which is enabled when <OUTPUT> has an _mp4_ extension, one
_class_ of waveforms will be displayed per video frame. The <INPUT> files may
specify more than one waveform per transmit-receive key; a class of waveforms
is all waveforms that have a common key. All classes must have the same number
of constituent waveforms. Ordering of waveforms within each class is determined
by the lexicographical sorting of the names of the files containing the
waveforms.


## OPTIONS

- `-h`, `--help`:
  Print a help message and exit.

- `-E`, `--envelope`:
  Display waveform envelopes instead of signed waveform amplitude. Implies
  `--one-sided`.

- `-l`, `--log` (image mode only):
  Display log-magnitude plots (implies `-E`).

- `-z`, `--zero` (image mode only):
  When aligning waveforms based on arrival times provided as <ATIMES>, zero
  waveforms for which no arrival time is available. The zeroed waveforms are
  still plotted.

- `-s`, `--suppress`:
  When aligning waveforms based on arrival times provided as <ATIMES>, discard
  (do not plot) waveforms for which no arrival time is available.

- `-a` <ATIMES>, `--atimes` <ATIMES>:
  A path or glob to an arrival-time map as a keymat(7) to align waves. More
  than one `-a` argument may be provided to allow specification of multiple
  globs or files.
  
  When <ATIMES> is provided in image mode, waveforms will be aligned by
  shifting each waveform by the difference between its indicated arrival time
  and the mean of all arrival times for displayed waveforms.
  
  When <ATIMES> is provided in video mode, the bounds of the temporal axis will
  be chosen to start at the minimum displayed arrival time and end at the
  maximum displayed arrival time. Within each class, waveforms will be aligned
  by shifting each waveform in the class by the difference between its arrival
  time and that for the first member of the class. A marker will be placed on
  each frame to indicate the common aligned arrival time.

  If the number of arrival times for each transmit-receive key is more than one
  in image mode or does not equal the size of each waveform class in video
  mode, the `-c` flag will be required to indicate which values in an <ATIMES>
  record specify the times to use for alignment.

- `-w` <START> <END>, `--window` <START> <END>:
  Only display samples from <START> to <END>.
  
  If <ATIMES> is provided in image mode, <START> and <END> are added to the
  average arrival time to determine an absolute window about the aligned
  waveforms. If <ATIMES> is provided in video mode, <START> is added to the
  earliest displayed arrival time and <END> is added to the latest displayed
  arrival time to determine bounds for the temporal axis.

- `-c` <COL>, `--cols` <COL>:
  Select from <ATIMES> the indicated column <COL> to use for aligning
  waveforms. In image mode, at most one <COL> may be provided.
  
  In video mode, one `-c` specifier should be provided for every member of a
  waveform class. The order of <COL> specifications corresponds to the lexical
  ordering of waveforms in each class. It is acceptable to repeat <COL> values.

- `-t` <THRESH>, `--thresh` <THRESH>:
  Set the amplitude limit (color scale for image mode, y axis for video mode).

  For linear display modes, a color limit <CMAX> is established from <THRESH>
  as <CMAX> = <MEAN> + <THRESH> * <STD>, where <MEAN> and <STD> are,
  respectively, the mean and standard deviation of the peak amplitudes of all
  displayed waveforms. When the display is one-sided (by specifying either
  `--one-sided` or `-E`), the amplitude limit is (0, <CMAX>). When the display
  is two-sided, the amplitude limit is (-<CMAX>, <CMAX>).

  For the logarithmic image display mode, teh value of <THRESH> should be
  negative. The high end of the color scale will also be the peak amplitude of
  all plotted waves, and the low end of the color scale will be a value
  <THRESH> dB below the peak.

- `-f` <FREQ>, `--freq` <FREQ>:
  Frequency of samples in waveform files; used to convert absolute arrival
  times to samples.

- `-n` <NSAMP>, `--nsamp` <NSAMP>:
  Force all waveform files to have <NSAMP> samples, instead of a value encoded
  the input file.

- `-b` <BITRATE>, `--bitrate` <BITRATE> (video mode only):
  Set bitrate for video output in kbps

- `--one-sided`:
  Use a one-sided color or amplitude scale.

- `-r`, `--skip-alignment` (video mode only):
  Do not align waveforms based on <ATIMES>, but show the arrival times in video
  frames. One marker will be shown for every waveform in the class, rather than
  showing a single marker for the common arrival time when waveforms are
  aligned.

- `-e`, `--equalize`:
  Equalize waveforms to have unit peak amplitude.
  
  In video mode, a single `-e` flag will cause the relative amplitudes of
  waveforms in a single class to be preserved (thus, all waveforms in a class
  are divided by the highest peak amplitude in the class). If a second `-e`
  flag is provided in video mode, all waveforms within a class will be
  equalized independently, discarding relative amplitude variations.


## COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2014--2018 Andrew J. Hesford. All rights reserved.


## SEE ALSO

keymat(7) - For a description of the keymat format  
WaveformMap(7) - For a description of the WaveformMap format
