# wmap-extract.py(1) -- extract subsets of WaveformMap(7) files

## SYNOPSIS

`wmap-extract.py` [`-h`] [`-m` <TRMAP>] [`-r` <RANDOM>] [`-c` <COMPRESSION>]
                  [`-b`] [`-o` <OUTPUT>] <INPUT> [<INPUT> ...]



## DESCRIPTION

Given one or more WaveformMap(7) files <INPUT>, extract a subset of waveforms
and store to a new WaveformMap(7) output. The subset of waveforms to extract
may be backscatter (when the transmit and receive indices of the input
waveforms are identical) or may be specified in a TRMAP-formatted file as
described in `fhfft.py(1)`. For extractions defined in a TRMAP file, a random
subset of the TRMAP pairs may optionally be selected.


## OPTIONS

- `-h`, `--help`:
  Print a help message and exit.

- `-m` <TRMAP>, `--trmap` <TRMAP>:
  The path to a collection of desired transmit-receive pairs in a
  TRMAP-formatted file.

- `-r` <RANDOM>, `--random` <RANDOM>:
  When in the range (0, 1), <RANDOM> specifies the desired fraction of input
  waveforms common to <INPUT> and <TRMAP> that will be randomly selected for
  output.

  When greater than or equal to 1, <RANDOM> should be an integer that specifies
  the total number of transmit-receive pairs from <TRMAP> desired in the
  output. Waveforms will be randomly extracted from each <INPUT> in proportion
  such that, if all <INPUT> files provide waveforms for all transmit-receive
  pairs in <TRMAP>, the total number of extracted waveforms will be
  approximately equal to <RANDOM>.

- `-c` <COMPRESSION>, `--compression` <COMPRESSION>:
  Enable compression of the output WaveformMap(7) file. <COMPRESSION> must be
  one of _bzip2_, _lzma_ or _deflate_.
  
- `-b`, `--backscatter`:
  Rather than extract waveforms according to <RANDOM> and <TRMAP>, just extract
  backscatter waveforms.

- `-o` <OUTPUT>, `--output` <OUTPUT>:
  Save extracted waveforms to <OUTPUT> (default: replace <INPUT> extension with
  'extract.wmz').


## COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2014--2018 Andrew J. Hesford. All rights reserved.


## SEE ALSO

fhfft.py(1) - For a description of the TRMAP format  
WaveformMap(7) - For a description of the WaveformMap format
